Do you think you got enough sleep this past week? Can you recall the last time
you woke up without an alarm clock feeling refreshed, not needing caffeine? If the
answer to either of these questions is “no,” you are not alone. Two-thirds of adults
throughout all developed nations fail to obtain the recommended eight hours of
nightly sleep. I
I doubt you are surprised by this fact, but you may be surprised by the
consequences. Routinely sleeping less than six or seven hours a night demolishes
your immune system, more than doubling your risk of cancer. Insufficient sleep is
a key lifestyle factor determining whether or not you will develop Alzheimer’s
disease. Inadequate sleep—even moderate reductions for just one week—disrupts
blood sugar levels so profoundly that you would be classified as pre-diabetic.
Short sleeping increases the likelihood of your coronary arteries becoming
blocked and brittle, setting you on a path toward cardiovascular disease, stroke,
and congestive heart failure. Fitting Charlotte Brontë’s prophetic wisdom that “a
ruffled mind makes a restless pillow,” sleep disruption further contributes to all
major psychiatric conditions, including depression, anxiety, and suicidality.
Perhaps you have also noticed a desire to eat more when you’re tired? This is
no coincidence. Too little sleep swells concentrations of a hormone that makes
you feel hungry while suppressing a companion hormone that otherwise signals
food satisfaction. Despite being full, you still want to eat more. It’s a proven recipe
for weight gain in sleep-deficient adults and children alike. Worse, should you

Worse, should you
attempt to diet but don’t get enough sleep while doing so, it is futile, since most of
the weight you lose will come from lean body mass, not fat.
Add the above health consequences up, and a proven link becomes easier to
accept: the shorter your sleep, the shorter your life span. The old maxim “I’ll sleep
when I’m dead” is therefore unfortunate. Adopt this mind-set, and you will be
dead sooner and the quality of that (shorter) life will be worse. The elastic band of
sleep deprivation can stretch only so far before it snaps. Sadly, human beings are
in fact the only species that will deliberately deprive themselves of sleep without
legitimate gain. Every component of wellness, and countless seams of societal
fabric, are being eroded by our costly state of sleep neglect: human and financial
alike. So much so that the World Health Organization (WHO) has now declared a
https://www.8freebooks.netsleep loss epidemic throughout industrialized nations. II It is no coincidence that 

countries where sleep time has declined most dramatically over the past century,
such as the US, the UK, Japan, and South Korea, and several in western Europe,
are also those suffering the greatest increase in rates of the aforementioned
physical diseases and mental disorders.
Scientists such as myself have even started lobbying doctors to start
“prescribing” sleep. As medical advice goes, it’s perhaps the most painless and
enjoyable to follow. Do not, however, mistake this as a plea to doctors to start
prescribing more sleeping pills—quite the opposite, in fact, considering the
alarming evidence surrounding the deleterious health consequences of these
drugs.
But can we go so far as to say that a lack of sleep can kill you outright?
Actually, yes—on at least two counts. First, there is a very rare genetic disorder
that starts with a progressive insomnia, emerging in midlife. Several months into
the disease course, the patient stops sleeping altogether. By this stage, they have
started to lose many basic brain and body functions. No drugs that we currently
have will help the patient sleep. After twelve to eighteen months of no sleep, the
patient will die. Though exceedingly rare, this disorder asserts that a lack of sleep
can kill a human being.